## Blog 1 (July 3, 2018): A New Beginning
### *by Ameya Patkar*

What’s up everyone. I am a first-year intern here in the Stanford Earth Young Investigators Program and I am a part of the group of 10 students who work in the Biodiversity group.

In the science courses that I’ve taken in the past, we’ve always glossed over the evolutionary and ecological history of life, focusing mainly on things pertaining to molecular biology. It was a whole field that was written off as being not worthy of spending time on. Considering the current environmental crisis we have and our dependence on the Earth, I have no idea why we haven’t been emphasizing education in Earth Sciences. The school I come from doesn’t have any environmental science courses so I joined SEYI to fill in the gap in my education.

Now, starting the third week of this internship, I’m astounded by all I’ve learned so far. When I came to Stanford, I only had a rudimentary knowledge of Earth Science (coming from 4th and 6th grade. I’m entering into 12th grade next year!). During our first Thursday activity meeting, we had a refresher course in Earthquakes and Plate Tectonics. We then looked at different maps all displaying different data on earthquakes, seafloor age, volcanic activity, and more to try and determine what kind of different plates are in each area and any additional information that we could gather. This was a great exercise in analyzing data, something that the Biodiversity group is going to do with Noel during the rest of this summer.

For our first real day in the Biodiversity group, we created a Geologic Time Scale. I was familiar with terms such as the Jurassic and Cretaceous from various kids shows that I watched while growing up and periods such as the Cambrian from classes at school. However, my knowledge of Earth’s history was severely lacking up until we made this scale. It was a super cool crash course in the events that made up the world as we know it today.

Currently, at the Geology Corner, we began each day by reading and discussing research articles that describe things such as body size evolution, different evolutionary trends, and different models for how organisms evolved throughout the history of the earth. While I have skimmed research articles to write scientific reports in class, this was the first time I actually went in depth in reading papers. They were difficult to understand at first with their obscure terminology and abstract statistical methods (like Akaike weights), but eventually, they became easier to digest as we read more articles. It was a great lesson in not only evolutionary history but also scientific writing. As part of our discussions, Noel asked us to think about how each figure/table could be improved and made more clear which is going to be really helpful for the paper we are writing as part of this internship.

After the papers, we have some free time to code with R, a programming language for statistical analysis. R was easy to pick up because of its similarity to languages that I’ve learned prior such as Java but its usage is vastly different. With R, we could easily (with a little help from Noel) make analyze large chunks of data (I’m talking tens of thousands of pieces of data) and make very aesthetic graphs. I’m around ¾s done with the lessons that Noel provided us and I can’t wait to complete the course and apply what I know on our project.

Prior to starting the project (which we started today, July 2nd), we had labs in the afternoon where we examined different fossils and learned about their structure and mode of life. For the final lab, we tried to make a phylogenetic tree for 3 classes in the phylum Mollusca: Bivalvia, Cephalopoda, and Gastropoda. It was really difficult to quantify the positions of specific species on the tree based on morphology alone as well as identify the class for some of the species (For example, We thought abalones and limpets were of the class Bivalvia because of their shells but it turns out that they are actually from Gastropoda). These labs were super informative. I never really paid attention to the anatomy of the life forms that surrounded me up until this moment. It’s so interesting how some animals that look completely different such as coral and jellyfish have really similar body plans.

Today afternoon, we started planning out our research for the rest of the summer. I’m going to be working on phyla along with Loc. Today, it was a bit hard trying to figure out where to start due to the vastness of our topic and the many directions we could go but we managed to come up with some areas we could focus on.

Well, it’s really late right now and tomorrow is our field trip to New Brighton State Beach and the Seymour Marine Discovery Center. This internship has been really fun and enriching so far and I can’t wait for what the next 5.5 weeks will bring!